README.md, before:

<div align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny/">
        <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/php.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for PHP">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny.js/">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/javascript.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for JavaScript (Node.js)">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny.go/">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/golang.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for Golang">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny.py/">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/python.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for Python">
    </a>
</div>

## About Teeny.js

The main objective of this project is to be light, simple, easy to learn, to serve other projects that need a route system to use together with other libraries and mainly to explore the native resources from language and engine (Node).

## Advantages of using Teeny.js

It is possible to use modules in the routes and method `app.handlerCodes()` and these modules are loaded only when necessary.

When you edit the file containing the routes, **Teeny.js** detects and updates everything on its own without having to restart the server, something that is often necessary in other similar libs. This makes it easy to quickly maintain or reconfigure anything called within `routes.js`.

It is possible to create your own patterns to use in route parameters.

## Configure your project

Before start, Node10+ is required.

If not created a project you can create using `npm init`, first create a folder named `blog`:

```
mkdir blog
cd blog
npm init
```

Or can copy [`./example`](./example) folder

For install use:

```
npm i teeny.js
```

In example create you can use `index.js` or other and put routes in a script named `routes.js` (or other name), example:

``` javascript
const { Teeny } = require('teeny.js');

const app = new Teeny(`${__dirname}/routes.js`, 7000);

app.exec();
```

The `${__dirname}/routes.js` is your module with routes and configs and `7000` is the HTTP port.

The `request` contains [`http.ClientRequest`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_clientrequest) object and `response` contains [`http.ServerResponse`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse)

``` javascript
module.exports = (app) => {
    app.action('GET', '/', (request, response) => {
        return 'Hello World!';
    });

    app.action('GET', '/about', (request, response) => {
        return 'About example!';
    });
};
```

For config routes or others edits the `routes.js`, when saving to the file teeny himself will update the routes without having to restart the server. Uses `app.setDebug(...);` method for enable or disable debug mode (`false` by default), example:

``` javascript
module.exports = (app) => {
    // Enable debug
    app.setDebug(true);

    app.action('GET', '/', (request, response) => {
        return 'Hello World!';
    });

...
```

For start application use command:

```
node index.js
```

## Methods for config Teeny.js

Method | Description
--- | ------
`new Teeny(String routesPath, Number port)` | configure routes (or others methods from class) and port
`new Teeny(String routesPath, Object config)` | configure routes and server config on second param (see: https://nodejs.org/api/net.html#net_server_listen_options_callback)
`app.action(String\|Array methods, String path, Function callback)` | Define a route (from HTTP path in URL) for execute a function, arrow function or anonymous function
`app.action(String\|Array methods, String path, String module)` | Define a route for load and execute other "local" module (it is recommended to set the absolute path)
`app.handlerCodes(Array codes, Function callback)` | Catch http errors (like `ErrorDocument` or `error_page`) from ISPAI or if try access a route not defined (emits `404 Not Found`) or if try access a defined route with not defined http method (emits `405 Method Not Allowed`)
`app.handlerCodes(Array codes, String module)` | Catch http errors or errors from routes, if catchs a error execute a "local" module defined in second argument
`app.setDebug(Boolean enable)` | Define if debug is on (`true`) or off (`false`), by default is `false`
`app.setPublic(String path)` | Define path for use static files
`app.setPattern(String name, String regex)` | Create a pattern for use in route params
`app.setRequire(String path)` | Set require path for load modules, this function affects the `routes.js` location and modules loaded by the `app.action(methods, module)` method
`app.exec(): Promise<Object>` | Starts server, promise returns server info like `{address: "127.0.0.1", port: 7000}` (see https://nodejs.org/api/net.html#net_server_address)
`app.stop(): Promise<Object>` | Stops server, promise returns server info

## Patterns supported by param routes

You can create your own patterns to use with the routes in "Teeny.js", but there are also ready-to-use patterns:

Pattern | Regex used | Description
--- | --- | ---
`alnum` | `[\\da-zA-Z]+` | Matches routes with param using alpha-numeric in route
`alpha` | `[a-zA-Z]+` | Matches routes with param using A to Z letters in route
`decimal` | `\\d+\\.\\d+` | Matches routes with param using decimal format (like `1.2`, `3.5`, `100.50`) in route
`num` | `\\d+` | Matches routes with param using numeric format in route
`noslash` | `[^\\/]+` | Matches routes with param using any character except slashs (`\/` or `/`) in route
`nospace` | `\\S+` | Matches routes with param using any character except spaces, tabs or NUL in route
`uuid` | `[0-9a-fA-F]{8}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{12}` | Matches routes with param using uuid format in route
`version` | `\\d+\\.\\d+(\\.\\d+(-[\\da-zA-Z]+(\\.[\\da-zA-Z]+)*(\\+[\\da-zA-Z]+(\\.[\\da-zA-Z]+)*)?)?)?` | Matches routes with param using [`semver.org`](https://semver.org/) format in route

For use a pattern in routes, set like this:

``` javascript
module.exports = (app) => {
    app.action('GET', '/user/<name:alnum>', (request, response, params) => {
        return `Hello ${params.alnum}`;
    });

    app.action('GET', '/api/<foobar:version>', (request, response, params) => {
        return `Version: ${params.foobar}`;
    });

    app.action('GET', '/product/<id:num>', (request, response, params) => {
        return `Product ID: ${params.id}`;
    });
...
```

## Send big files for HTTP response

When loading in a variable directly all the contents of a file to send with "return" in the response of a route may crash the application or even the server, instead of reading the entire file you must make use of what already exists in Node , the "pipe" of streams. An example to send files of different sizes to download in the HTTP response:

``` javascript
app.action('GET', '/foo/bar/download', (request, response) => {
    if (/* condition for allow access file */) {
        const file = '/home/user/foo/bar/storage/big.file';
        const lstat = fs.lstatSync(file);

        // Check is exists and if is file
        if (lstat.isFile()) {

            // Create a stream for big.file
            const streamFileExample = fs.createReadStream(file);

            // Trigger when open the stream
            streamFileExample.on('open', () => {

                // Sent file size with Content-Length in header
                response.writeHead(200, {
                    'Content-Length': lstat.size
                });

                // Uses .pipe() for sent data for response
                streamFileExample.pipe(response);
            });

            // If failed sent 500 HTTP status
            streamFileExample.on('error', (err) => {
                response.writeHead(500);
                response.end(err);
            });
        }
    } else {
        response.writeHead(404);
        response.end('Invalid file');
    }
});

```

## Set require function in Node.js v12.2.0+

Set path from current script using `module.createRequire`:

``` javascript
const { createRequire } = require('module');
const { Teeny } = require('Teeny.js');

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequire('/foo/bar/baz/.'));

app.exec();
```

Using "ECMAScript modules" for load from same level path (like: `__dirname`):

``` javascript
import { Teeny } from 'Teeny.js';
import { createRequire } from 'module';

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequire(import.meta.url));

app.exec();
```

## Set require function in old Node.js versions

Set path from current script using `module.createRequireFromPath` (deprecated):

``` javascript
const { createRequireFromPath } = require('module');
const { Teeny } = require('teeny.js');

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequireFromPath('/foo/bar/baz/.'));

app.exec();
```

Using "ECMAScript modules":

``` javascript
import { Teeny } from 'Teeny.js';
import { createRequireFromPath } from 'module';
import { fileURLToPath } from 'url';
import { dirname } from 'path';

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequireFromPath('/foo/bar/baz/.'));

app.exec();
```

Commit message:

Version 0.1.10
- Fixed `request.url` encoded, using `decodeURIComponent(request.url)`
- Support for add real regex in `app.setPattern()` (don't support flags)
- Fixed issue in route paths with characters used in RegExp
- Fixed pattern name in routes
- Fixed route params

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny/">
        <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/php.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for PHP">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny.js/">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/javascript.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for JavaScript (Node.js)">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny.go/">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/golang.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for Golang">
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/inphinit/teeny.py/">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/inphinit/teeny/master/badges/python.png" width="160" alt="Teeny route system for Python">
    </a>
</div>

## About Teeny.js

The main objective of this project is to be light, simple, easy to learn, to serve other projects that need a route system to use together with other libraries and mainly to explore the native resources from language and engine (Node).

## Advantages of using Teeny.js

It is possible to use modules in the routes and method `app.handlerCodes()` and these modules are loaded only when necessary.

When you edit the file containing the routes, **Teeny.js** detects and updates everything on its own without having to restart the server, something that is often necessary in other similar libs. This makes it easy to quickly maintain or reconfigure anything called within `routes.js`.

It is possible to create your own patterns to use in route parameters.

## Configure your project

Before start, Node10+ is required.

If not created a project you can create using `npm init`, first create a folder named `blog`:

```
mkdir blog
cd blog
npm init
```

Or can copy [`./example`](./example) folder

For install use:

```
npm i teeny.js
```

In example create you can use `index.js` or other and put routes in a script named `routes.js` (or other name), example:

``` javascript
const { Teeny } = require('teeny.js');

const app = new Teeny(`${__dirname}/routes.js`, 7000);

app.exec();
```

The `${__dirname}/routes.js` is your module with routes and configs and `7000` is the HTTP port.

The `request` contains [`http.ClientRequest`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_clientrequest) object and `response` contains [`http.ServerResponse`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse)

``` javascript
module.exports = (app) => {
    app.action('GET', '/', (request, response) => {
        return 'Hello World!';
    });

    app.action('GET', '/about', (request, response) => {
        return 'About example!';
    });
};
```

For config routes or others edits the `routes.js`, when saving to the file teeny himself will update the routes without having to restart the server. Uses `app.setDebug(...);` method for enable or disable debug mode (`false` by default), example:

``` javascript
module.exports = (app) => {
    // Enable debug
    app.setDebug(true);

    app.action('GET', '/', (request, response) => {
        return 'Hello World!';
    });

...
```

For start application use command:

```
node index.js
```

## Methods for config Teeny.js

Method | Description
--- | ------
`new Teeny(String routesPath, Number port)` | configure routes (or others methods from class) and port
`new Teeny(String routesPath, Object config)` | configure routes and server config on second param (see: https://nodejs.org/api/net.html#net_server_listen_options_callback)
`app.action(String\|Array methods, String path, Function callback)` | Define a route (from HTTP path in URL) for execute a function, arrow function or anonymous function
`app.action(String\|Array methods, String path, String module)` | Define a route for load and execute other "local" module (it is recommended to set the absolute path)
`app.handlerCodes(Array codes, Function callback)` | Catch http errors (like `ErrorDocument` or `error_page`) from ISPAI or if try access a route not defined (emits `404 Not Found`) or if try access a defined route with not defined http method (emits `405 Method Not Allowed`)
`app.handlerCodes(Array codes, String module)` | Catch http errors or errors from routes, if catchs a error execute a "local" module defined in second argument
`app.setDebug(Boolean enable)` | Define if debug is on (`true`) or off (`false`), by default is `false`
`app.setPublic(String path)` | Define path for use static files
`app.setPattern(String name, String regex)` | Create a pattern for use in route params
`app.setPattern(String name, RegExp regex)` | Create a pattern using a RegExp object
`app.setRequire(String path)` | Set require path for load modules, this function affects the `routes.js` location and modules loaded by the `app.action(methods, module)` method
`app.exec(): Promise<Object>` | Starts server, promise returns server info like `{address: "127.0.0.1", port: 7000}` (see https://nodejs.org/api/net.html#net_server_address)
`app.stop(): Promise<Object>` | Stops server, promise returns server info

## Patterns supported by param routes

You can create your own patterns to use with the routes in "Teeny.js", but there are also ready-to-use patterns:

Pattern | Regex used | Description
--- | --- | ---
`alnum` | `[\da-zA-Z]+` | Matches routes with param using alpha-numeric in route
`alpha` | `[a-zA-Z]+` | Matches routes with param using A to Z letters in route
`decimal` | `\d+\.\d+` | Matches routes with param using decimal format (like `1.2`, `3.5`, `100.50`) in route
`num` | `\d+` | Matches routes with param using numeric format in route
`noslash` | `[^\/]+` | Matches routes with param using any character except slashs (`\/` or `/`) in route
`nospace` | `\S+` | Matches routes with param using any character except spaces, tabs or NUL in route
`uuid` | `[0-9a-fA-F]{8}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{12}` | Matches routes with param using uuid format in route
`version` | `\d+\.\d+(\.\d+(-[\da-zA-Z]+(\.[\da-zA-Z]+)*(\+[\da-zA-Z]+(\.[\da-zA-Z]+)*)?)?)?` | Matches routes with param using [`semver.org`](https://semver.org/) format in route

For use a pattern in routes, set like this:

``` javascript
module.exports = (app) => {
    app.action('GET', '/user/<name:alnum>', (request, response, params) => {
        return `Hello ${params.alnum}`;
    });

    app.action('GET', '/api/<foobar:version>', (request, response, params) => {
        return `Version: ${params.foobar}`;
    });

    app.action('GET', '/product/<id:num>', (request, response, params) => {
        return `Product ID: ${params.id}`;
    });
...
```

## Send big files for HTTP response

When loading in a variable directly all the contents of a file to send with "return" in the response of a route may crash the application or even the server, instead of reading the entire file you must make use of what already exists in Node , the "pipe" of streams. An example to send files of different sizes to download in the HTTP response:

``` javascript
app.action('GET', '/foo/bar/download', (request, response) => {
    if (/* condition for allow access file */) {
        const file = '/home/user/foo/bar/storage/big.file';
        const lstat = fs.lstatSync(file);

        // Check is exists and if is file
        if (lstat.isFile()) {

            // Create a stream for big.file
            const streamFileExample = fs.createReadStream(file);

            // Trigger when open the stream
            streamFileExample.on('open', () => {

                // Sent file size with Content-Length in header
                response.writeHead(200, {
                    'Content-Length': lstat.size
                });

                // Uses .pipe() for sent data for response
                streamFileExample.pipe(response);
            });

            // If failed sent 500 HTTP status
            streamFileExample.on('error', (err) => {
                response.writeHead(500);
                response.end(err);
            });
        }
    } else {
        response.writeHead(404);
        response.end('Invalid file');
    }
});

```

## Set require function in Node.js v12.2.0+

Set path from current script using `module.createRequire`:

``` javascript
const { createRequire } = require('module');
const { Teeny } = require('Teeny.js');

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequire('/foo/bar/baz/.'));

app.exec();
```

Using "ECMAScript modules" for load from same level path (like: `__dirname`):

``` javascript
import { Teeny } from 'Teeny.js';
import { createRequire } from 'module';

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequire(import.meta.url));

app.exec();
```

## Set require function in old Node.js versions

Set path from current script using `module.createRequireFromPath` (deprecated):

``` javascript
const { createRequireFromPath } = require('module');
const { Teeny } = require('teeny.js');

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequireFromPath('/foo/bar/baz/.'));

app.exec();
```

Using "ECMAScript modules":

``` javascript
import { Teeny } from 'Teeny.js';
import { createRequireFromPath } from 'module';
import { fileURLToPath } from 'url';
import { dirname } from 'path';

const app = new Teeny('./routes.js', 7000);

app.setRequire(createRequireFromPath('/foo/bar/baz/.'));

app.exec();
```
